The zinc finger protein tristetraprolin (TTP) promotes translation repression and degradation of mRNAs containing AU-rich elements (AREs). Although much attention has been directed toward understanding the decay process and machinery involved, the translation repression role of TTP has remained poorly understood. Here we identify the cap-binding translation repression 4EHP-GYF2 complex as a cofactor of TTP. Immunoprecipitation and in vitro pull-down assays demonstrate that TTP associates with the 4EHP-GYF2 complex via direct interaction with GYF2, and mutational analyses show that this interaction occurs via conserved tetraproline motifs of TTP. Mutant TTP with diminished 4EHP-GYF2 binding is impaired in its ability to repress a luciferase reporter ARE-mRNA. 4EHP knockout mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) display increased induction and slower turnover of TTP-target mRNAs as compared to wild-type MEFs. Our work highlights the function of the conserved tetraproline motifs of TTP and identifies 4EHP-GYF2 as a cofactor in translational repression and mRNA decay by TTP.
Widespread mRNA decay, an unappreciated feature of apoptosis, enhances cell death and depends on mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization (MOMP), TUTases, and DIS3L2. Which RNAs are decayed and the decay-initiating event are unknown. Here, we show extensive decay of mRNAs and poly(A) noncoding (nc)RNAs at the 3′ end, triggered by the mitochondrial intermembrane space 3′-to-5′ exoribonuclease PNPT1, released during MOMP. PNPT1 knockdown inhibits apoptotic RNA decay and reduces apoptosis, while ectopic expression of PNPT1, but not an RNase-deficient mutant, increases RNA decay and cell death. The 3′ end of PNPT1 substrates thread through a narrow channel. Many non-poly(A) ncRNAs contain 3′-secondary structures or bind proteins that may block PNPT1 activity. Indeed, mutations that disrupt the 3′-stem-loop of a decay-resistant ncRNA render the transcript susceptible, while adding a 3′-stem-loop to an mRNA prevents its decay. Thus, PNPT1 release from mitochondria during MOMP initiates apoptotic decay of RNAs lacking 3′-structures.
Assignment of cell types from single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) data remains a time-consuming and error-prone process. Current packages for identity assignment use limited types of reference data and often have rigid data structure requirements. We developed the clustifyr R package to leverage several external data types, including gene expression profiles to assign likely cell types using data from scRNA-seq, bulk RNA-seq, microarray expression data, or signature gene lists. We benchmark various parameters of a correlation-based approach and implement gene list enrichment methods. clustifyr is a lightweight and effective cell-type assignment tool developed for compatibility with various scRNA-seq analysis workflows.
Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) provides an unprecedented view of cellular diversity of biological systems. However, across the thousands of publications and datasets generated using this technology, we estimate that only a minority (<25%) of studies provide cell-level metadata information containing identified cell types and related findings of the published dataset. Metadata omission hinders reproduction, exploration, validation, and knowledge transfer and is a common problem across journals, data repositories, and publication dates. We encourage investigators, reviewers, journals, and data repositories to improve their standards and ensure proper documentation of these valuable datasets.
Hibernation is a physiological and behavioral phenotype that minimizes energy expenditure. Hibernators cycle between profound depression and rapid hyperactivation of multiple physiological processes, challenging our concept of mammalian homeostasis. How the hibernator orchestrates and survives these extremes while maintaining cell to organismal viability is unknown. Here, we enhance the genome integrity and annotation of a model hibernator, the 13-lined ground squirrel. Our new assembly brings this genome to near chromosome-level contiguity and adds thousands of previously unannotated genes. These new genomic resources were used to identify 6,505 hibernation-related, differentially-expressed and processed transcripts using RNA-seq data from three brain regions in animals whose physiological status was precisely defined using body temperature telemetry. A software tool, squirrelBox, was developed to foster further data analyses and visualization. SquirrelBox includes a comprehensive toolset for rapid visualization of gene level and cluster group dynamics, sequence scanning of k-mer and domains, and interactive exploration of gene lists. Using these new tools and data, we deconvolute seasonal from temperature-dependent effects on the brain transcriptome during hibernation for the first time, highlighting the importance of carefully timed samples for studies of differential gene expression in hibernation. The identified genes include a regulatory network of RNA binding proteins that are dynamic in hibernation along with the composition of the RNA pool. In addition to passive effects of temperature, we provide evidence for regulated transcription and RNA turnover during hibernation. Significant alternative splicing, largely temperature dependent, also occurs during hibernation. These findings form a crucial first step and provide a roadmap for future work toward defining novel mechanisms of tissue protection and metabolic depression that may 1 day be applied toward improving human health.
Angiotensin II (AngII) binds to the type I angiotensin receptor in the adrenal cortex to initiate a cascade of events leading to the production of aldosterone, a master regulator of blood pressure. Despite extensive characterization of the transcriptional and enzymatic control of adrenocortical steroidogenesis, there are still major gaps in our knowledge related to precise regulation of AII-induced gene expression kinetics. Specifically, we do not know the regulatory contribution of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) and RNA decay, which can control the timing of stimulus-induced gene expression. To investigate this question, we performed a high-resolution RNA-seq time course of the AngII stimulation response and 4-thiouridine pulse labeling in a steroidogenic human cell line (H295R). We identified twelve temporally distinct gene expression responses that contained mRNA encoding proteins known to be important for various steps of aldosterone production, such as cAMP signaling components and steroidogenic enzymes. AngII response kinetics for many of these mRNAs revealed a coordinated increase in both synthesis and decay. These findings were validated in primary human adrenocortical cells stimulated ex vivo with AngII. Using a candidate siRNA screen, we identified a subset of RNA-binding protein and RNA decay factors that activate or repress AngII-stimulated aldosterone production. Among the repressors of aldosterone were BTG2, which promotes deadenylation and global RNA decay. BTG2 was induced in response to AngII stimulation and promoted the repression of mRNAs encoding pro-steroidogenic factors indicating the existence of an incoherent feedforward loop controlling aldosterone homeostasis. Together, these data support a model in which coordinated increases in transcription and regulated RNA decay facilitates the major transcriptomic changes required to implement a pro-steroidogenic gene expression program that is temporally restricted to prevent aldosterone overproduction.
Hibernators dramatically lower metabolism to save energy while fasting for months. Prolonged fasting challenges metabolic homeostasis, yet small-bodied hibernators emerge each spring ready to resume all aspects of active life, including immediate reproduction. The liver is the body’s metabolic hub, processing and detoxifying macromolecules to provide essential fuels to brain, muscle and other organs throughout the body. Here we quantify changes in liver gene expression across several distinct physiological states of hibernation in 13-lined ground squirrels, using RNA-seq to measure the steady-state transcriptome and GRO-seq to measure transcription for the first time in a hibernator. Our data capture key timepoints in both the seasonal and torpor-arousal cycles of hibernation. Strong positive correlation between transcription and the transcriptome indicates that transcriptional control dominates the known seasonal reprogramming of metabolic gene expression in liver for hibernation. During the torpor-arousal cycle, however, discordance develops between transcription and the steady-state transcriptome by at least two mechanisms: 1) although not transcribed during torpor, some transcripts are unusually stable across the torpor bout; and 2) unexpectedly, on some genes, our data suggest continuing, slow elongation with a failure to terminate transcription across the torpor bout. While the steady-state RNAs corresponding to these read through transcripts did not increase during torpor, they did increase shortly after rewarming despite their simultaneously low transcription. Both of these mechanisms would assure the immediate availability of functional transcripts upon rewarming. Integration of transcriptional, post-transcriptional and RNA stability control mechanisms, all demonstrated in these data, likely initiate a serial gene expression program across the short euthermic period that restores the tissue and prepares the animal for the next bout of torpor.
Adrenal steroid hormone production is a dynamic process stimulated by adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and angiotensin II (AngII). These ligands initialize a rapid and robust gene expression response required for steroidogenesis. Here, we compare the predominant human immortalized cell line model, H295R cell, with primary cultures of adult adrenocortical cells derived from human kidney donors. We performed temporally resolved RNA-seq on primary cells stimulated with either ACTH or AngII at multiple time points. The magnitude of the expression dynamics elicited by ACTH was greater than AngII in primary cells. This is likely due to the larger population of adrenocortical cells that are responsive to ACTH. The dynamics of stimulus-induced expression in H295R cells are mostly recapitulated in primary cells. However, there are some expression responses in primary cells absent in H295R cells. These data are a resource for the endocrine community and will help researchers determine whether H295R is an appropriate model for the specific aspect of steroidogenesis that they are studying.
Alternative cleavage and polyadenylation (APA) contributes to the diversity of mRNA 3′ ends, affecting post-transcriptional regulation by including or excluding cis-regulatory elements in mRNAs, altering their stability and translational efficiency. While APA analysis has been applied broadly in mixed populations of cells, the heterogeneity of APA among single cells has only recently begun to be explored. We developed an approach we termed scraps (Single Cell RNA PolyA Site Discovery), implemented as a user-friendly, scalable, and reproducible end-to-end workflow, to identify polyadenylation sites at near-nucleotide resolution in single cells using 10X Genomics and other TVN-primed single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) libraries. Our approach, which performs best with long (>100bp) read 1 sequencing and paired alignment to the genome, is both unbiased relative to existing methods that utilize only read 2 and recovers more sites at higher resolution, despite the reduction in read quality observed on most modern DNA sequencers following homopolymer stretches. For libraries sequenced without long read 1, we implement a fallback approach using read 2-only alignments that performs similarly to our optimal approach, but recovers far fewer polyadenylation sites per experiment. scraps also enables assessment of internal priming capture events, which we demonstrate occur commonly but at higher frequency during apoptotic 3′ RNA decay. We also provide an R package, scrapR, that integrates the results of the scaps pipeline with the popular Seurat single-cell analysis package. Refinement and expanded application of these approaches will further clarify the role of APA in single cells, as well as the effects of internal priming on expression measurements in scRNA-seq libraries.
The diverse cellular constituents of childhood brain tumor ependymoma, recently revealed by single cell RNA-sequencing, may underly therapeutic resistance. Here we use spatial transcriptomics to further advance our understanding of the tumor microenvironment, mapping cellular subpopulations to the tumor architecture of ependymoma posterior fossa subgroup A (PFA), the commonest and most deadly childhood ependymoma variant. Methods. Spatial transcriptomics data from intact PFA sections was deconvoluted to resolve the histological ar- rangement of neoplastic and non-neoplastic cell types. Key findings were validated using immunohistochemistry, in vitro functional assays and outcome analysis in clinically-annotated PFA bulk transcriptomic data. PFA are comprised of epithelial and mesenchymal histological zones containing a diversity of cellular states, each zone including co-existing and spatially distinct undifferentiated progenitor-like cells; a quiescent mes- enchymal zone population, and a second highly mitotic progenitor population that is restricted to hypercellular ep- ithelial zones and that is more abundant in progressive tumors. We show that myeloid cell interaction is the leading cause of mesenchymal transition in PFA, occurring in zones spatially distinct from hypoxia-induced mesenchymal transition, and these distinct EMT-initiating processes were replicated using in vitro models of PFA. These insights demonstrate the utility of spatial transcriptomics to advance our understanding of ependymoma biology, revealing a clearer picture of the cellular constituents of PFA, their interactions and influ- ence on tumor progression.